.TH PVE-SAN-FENCED 8 "June 2026" "Version 0.1.0" "PVE SAN Fenced Daemon"
.SH NAME
pve-san-fenced \- SAN fencing daemon for Proxmox VE
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pve-san-fenced
[\fB\-\-poll\-interval\fR \fIseconds\fR]
[\fB\-\-discovery\-interval\fR \fIseconds\fR]
[\fB\-\-max\-failures\fR \fIcount\fR]
[\fB\-\-target\-wwids\fR \fIwwid1,wwid2,...\fR]
[\fB\-\-socket\fR \fIpath\fR]
[\fB\-\-node\-name\fR \fIname\fR]
[\fB\-\-pvesh\-command\fR \fIcommand\fR]
[\fB\-\-sysrq\-char\fR|\fB\-\-sysrq\-chars\fR \fIsequence\fR]
[\fB\-t\fR | \fB\-\-test\-mode\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pve-san-fenced
is a daemon that monitors the health of SAN/FC multipath storage devices actively used by running VMs on a Proxmox VE node. If all paths to the storage are lost persistently across multiple cycles, the daemon initiates a reboot or kernel panic using the Linux SysRq trigger to prevent split-brain conditions or VM corruption (fencing).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-poll\-interval " seconds"
Interval in seconds between checking multipath maps. Default is 5.
.TP
.BI \-\-discovery\-interval " seconds"
Interval in seconds between rescanning running VMs and storage configurations. Default is 60.
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-failures " count"
Number of consecutive polling failures (where all paths are offline/failed) required before triggering the fencing mechanism. Default is 6.
.TP
.BI \-\-target\-wwids " wwids"
Specific WWIDs to monitor. If not specified, monitors all multipath maps in use by running VMs.
.TP
.BI \-\-socket " path"
Multipathd abstract socket path to connect to. Default is @/org/kernel/linux/storage/multipathd.
.TP
.BI \-n ", " \-\-node\-name " name"
The name of the local Proxmox VE node. Default is the local hostname. Must exist as a directory in /etc/pve/nodes.
.TP
.BI \-\-pvesh\-command " command"
Command or path to use for Proxmox VE API queries. Default is "pvesh".
.TP
.BI \-\-sysrq\-char ", " \-\-sysrq\-chars " sequence"
Comma-separated list of characters to write to /proc/sysrq-trigger when fencing. Default is "s,b" (sync followed by reboot). Any sync ('s') triggers a 1-second sleep to wait for the sync to complete.
.TP
.B \-t ", " \-\-test\-mode
Run the daemon in test/dry-run mode. Fencing decisions and transitions are logged, but the reboot/panic is not triggered.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PVE_SAN_POLL_INTERVAL
Interval in seconds between checking multipath maps. Corresponds to \fB\-\-poll\-interval\fR.
.TP
.B PVE_SAN_DISCOVERY_INTERVAL
Interval in seconds between rescanning running VMs and storage configurations. Corresponds to \fB\-\-discovery\-interval\fR.
.TP
.B PVE_SAN_MAX_FAILURES
Number of consecutive polling failures required before triggering the fencing mechanism. Corresponds to \fB\-\-max\-failures\fR.
.TP
.B PVE_SAN_SOCKET
Multipathd abstract socket path to connect to. Corresponds to \fB\-\-socket\fR.
.TP
.B PVE_SAN_NODE_NAME
The name of the local Proxmox VE node. Corresponds to \fB\-\-node\-name\fR.
.TP
.B PVE_SAN_PVESH_COMMAND
Command or path to use for Proxmox VE API queries. Corresponds to \fB\-\-pvesh\-command\fR.
.TP
.B PVE_SAN_TEST_MODE
If set (to a non-empty, non-false value), runs the daemon in test/dry-run mode. Corresponds to \fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-test\-mode\fR.
.TP
.B PVE_SAN_SYSRQ_CHAR
Comma-separated list of characters to write to /proc/sysrq-trigger when fencing. Corresponds to \fB\-\-sysrq\-char\fR / \fB\-\-sysrq\-chars\fR.
.TP
.B PVE_SAN_FENCE_DRY_RUN
If set, the daemon acts as if running in test mode internally and exits instead of writing to the SysRq trigger.
.SH MULTIPATH CONFIGURATION
For the fencing daemon to operate safely and reliably,
.B multipathd
must be configured with specific settings. Add or update the following recommendations in the
.B defaults
section of
.I /etc/multipath.conf\fR:
.PP
.RS
.nf
defaults {
    no_path_retry "queue"
    dev_loss_tmo "infinity"
    polling_interval 5
    fast_io_fail_tmo 5
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
.TP
.BI no_path_retry " queue"
Keeps I/O queued when all paths are lost. This allows the fencing daemon time to monitor path state and decide whether to fence the node. If set to \fBfail\fR, I/O fails immediately, potentially causing VM file systems to switch to read-only before fencing occurs.
.TP
.BI dev_loss_tmo " infinity"
Prevents \fBmultipathd\fR from deleting the device mapper mapping after a timeout. If the device was deleted, the VM could not recover even if paths are restored, and the daemon would lose its ability to track the device.
.TP
.BI polling_interval " 5"
Aligns multipath daemon's path checking interval with the fencing daemon's poll interval.
.TP
.BI fast_io_fail_tmo " 5"
Promotes fast I/O failure detection.
.PP
The \fBpve-san-fenced\fR daemon automatically inspects these settings on startup and logs warnings if they do not match the recommended values.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /proc/sys/kernel/sysrq
Used to verify at startup if the configured SysRq character(s) are allowed by the system's SysRq bitmask.
.TP
.I /proc/sysrq-trigger
Written to trigger fencing.
.SH AUTHOR
Bernd Zeimetz <bernd@bzed.de>
